# Foundation

## What is this repo about?

My goal is to provide a promisified and TypeScript-friendly wrapper for `pm2`'s JavaScript API. Along the way, I may write better documentation for some of the features.

Some terms I'll use:

- Application -- delivers a major capability or feature offered to users; may be a product or part of a product
- Service -- a component of an application that owns all or part of the data and data management
- Instance -- a specific execution of a service

For example, if you offer a library management product:

- Application -- the catalog application; the circulation management application; the accessions management application (asset and inventory management)
- Process -- the catalog search service; the catalog user interface service; the user information service; the checkout/checkin service
- Instance -- to meet demand, we run five (or ten or more) copies of the catalog lookup service

Generally, a service runs on a single IP port, though it may be running many, load balanced instances behind that port.

## What is pm2?

`pm2` ([npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/pm2), [GitHub](https://github.com/Unitech/pm2), [docs](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/quick-start/) is a production process manager for Node applications. For production use cases, it seems to be the dominant option. Competitors include:

- [nodemon](https://github.com/remy/nodemon), which is aimed more at development than production
- [forever](https://github.com/foreversd/forever), which says, "Use pm2 or nodemon"
- StrongLoop's Process Manager ([website](https://strong-pm.io/), [GitHub](https://github.com/strongloop/strong-pm)), which is not under active development

`pm2`'s has a JavaScript API that supports interprocess (inter-instance) communication and lets developers connect an instance to the `pm2` daemon to get data from the daemon and control it. Developers can build a control plane API (same process or separate process) that provides information about application health and status. The JavaScript API also supports start/stop/restart, scale in/out, etc.

## So what's the problem?

`pm2`'s JavaScript API is a nice feature, but it is very much a product of the pre-ES5, callback-centric era in which it was developed. I get it--ain't broke, don't fix it. But, using it in a modern, Promise-aware, ES6+ application introduces an older (often alien) coding style that is hard to follow and can be challenging to get right.

`pm2` offers TypeScript types, which is great, but the types do not cover the full API. In fact, they don't cover much of the API TypeScript and friends refuse to allow calls to certain functions without a wall of compiler/linter comments that say, "Ignore this line."

`pm2` composes the JavaScript API into a `pm2` export, which is nice, but the functions composed use `this`, so promisifying them requires passing a `this` reference. Node's `util.promisify()` doesn't work. Generic promisify functions usually lose type information, which makes using them with TypeScript challenging.

`pm2` has documentation, but I found it difficult to understand and light on details. The JavaScript API documentation covers a fraction of the whole API. The GitHub repo has examples, but many of them are outdated or use undocumented parts of the API. For example, say you want an API endpoint to return custom application health data from all running instances of a process--or all processes. There's a way to do that, but not with the documented API, and the example uses an obsolete module (has a modern replacement, but the as-is example needs changes to work with the current pm2).

Unitech, the folks behind `pm2` offer a web-based pm2 monitoring product, [pm2.io](https://pm2.io/pricing) that solves some of these "problems." If that suits your needs, by all means, **use it and support the developers, they deserve it**. But:

- In some industries and in larger companies, corporate legal, risk, and cybersecurity teams take a dim view on information leaving the corporate network. Regulators make pronouncements that said teams often overinterpret and apply with rigorous paranoia that makes [Mordac](https://dilbert.com/strip/2007-11-16) look reasonable. In those cases, `pm2.io` isn't an option.
- `pm2.io` doesn't solve the callback issue. It doesn't extend the JavaScript API types for TypeScript users, though it may reduce the need for it. It doesn't sort out the confusing, historical spread of `pm2` components across various repos, documentation issues, etc.

My goal isn't to replace the services the commercial product provides. There is no UI offered here. My goal is to make the JavaScript API easier to use in modern applications.
